La Circle was one among many groups that Black women joined, participated in, or created in Milwaukee for community development and uplift. Women dominated the membership rolls of Black churches, for example, divided by economic class and denomination. For many working-class Black women, community development and activism revolved around their churches. Via these institutions, Black working women gave money in tithes and offerings, devoted their time, and served their communities. Social, civil, political, and educational clubs also proliferated among African American women in Milwaukee, part of a long national history that dated back to the 1890s and was known as the Black clubwomen’s movement.11 By the 1930s, some of Milwaukee’s clubs were affiliated with the National Association of Colored Women (NACW), with members attending NACW meetings and some becoming NACW officers. La Circle Club, therefore, emerged and grew out of a rich social and cultural milieu.12
La Circle Club evolved structurally over the years. When it was formed, middle-class community leaders at the MUL and the MYWCA determined its programs and course of action, especially in the early days of recruiting Black women to participate. Soon, however, the involvement of MUL and MYWCA staff lessened, as La Circle fell in line with the national structure of Y industrial clubs and began electing officers from its own membership and deciding without interference the nature of its programming. The emergence of La Circle Club, and its resulting popularity, demonstrated that it filled a need for Black working women in Milwaukee. Although there are no extant official membership lists for the La Circle Club throughout the 1940s, MYWCA records note club attendance between thirty to forty members each year of the decade.

In 1952, supported by the MUL, Frenchie Bell filed a complaint against her previous employer, Colonial Tanning Company, which she believed had fired her because of her race. WIC heard the case. While at the Colonial Tanning Company, Bell worked in the Leather Trimming Department. Workers trimmed leather in two different phases. During the first phase, workers trimmed large pieces that hung on a line that moved at a regulated speed. During the second phase, workers cut individual, smaller pieces of leather at a table at their own pace and were paid by the piece. Men most often worked the line because of the size of the pieces and the speed at which the work needed to be done. Women usually did piecework. According to Bell, the foreman George Nance placed her on the line without proper training. Consequently, she had trouble with the work. Nance accused Bell of slow- ing down the line and discarding a large amount of usable leather during the trimming process. Nance submitted a complaint to Colonial’s advisory committee, which arbitrated such grievances. The advisory committee heard Bell’s case and considered firing her, but, because this was Bell’s only official reprimand, the committee instead warned her and decreased her rate of pay. After this first hearing, Bell continued to face difficulties with George Nance at Colonial. 
